String Theory
University of Cambridge Part III Mathematical Tripos


Dr David Tong
   Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
   Centre for Mathematical Sciences,
   Wilberforce Road,
   Cambridge, CB3 OWA, UK


 0. Introduction
String theory is an ambitious project. It purports to be an all-encompassing theory
of the universe, unifying the forces of nature, including gravity, in a single quantum
mechanical framework.


   The premise of string theory is that, at the fundamental level, matter does not consist
of point-particles but rather of tiny loops of string. From this slightly absurd beginning,
the laws of physics emerge. General relativity, electromagnetism and Yang-Mills gauge
theories all appear in a surprising fashion. However, they come with baggage. String
theory gives rise to a host of other ingredients, most strikingly extra spatial dimensions
of the universe beyond the three that we have observed. The purpose of this course is
to understand these statements in detail.


   These lectures di er from most other courses that you will take in a physics degree.
String theory is speculative science. There is no experimental evidence that string
theory is the correct description of our world and scant hope that hard evidence will
arise in the near future. Moreover, string theory is very much a work in progress and
certain aspects of the theory are far from understood. Unresolved issues abound and
it seems likely that the final formulation has yet to be written. For these reasons, I’ll
begin this introduction by suggesting some answers to the question: Why study string
theory?


Reason 1. String theory is a theory of quantum gravity
String theory unifies Einstein’s theory of general relativity with quantum mechanics.
Moreover, it does so in a manner that retains the explicit connection with both quantum
theory and the low-energy description of spacetime.


  But quantum gravity contains many puzzles, both technical and conceptual. What
does spacetime look like at the shortest distance scales? How can we understand
physics if the causal structure fluctuates quantum mechanically? Is the big bang truely
the beginning of time? Do singularities that arise in black holes really signify the end
of time? What is the microscopic origin of black hole entropy and what is it telling
us? What is the resolution to the information paradox? Some of these issues will be
reviewed later in this introduction.


  Whether or not string theory is the true description of reality, it orders a framework
in which one can begin to explore these issues. For some questions, string theory
has given very impressive and compelling answers. For others, string theory has been
almost silent.




 Reason 2. String theory may be the theory of quantum gravity
With broad brush, string theory looks like an extremely good candidate to describe the
real world. At low-energies it naturally gives rise to general relativity, gauge theories,
scalar fields and chiral fermions. In other words, it contains all the ingredients that
make up our universe. It also gives the only presently credible explanation for the value
of the cosmological constant although, in fairness, I should add that the explanation is
so distasteful to some that the community is rather amusingly split between whether
this is a good thing or a bad thing. Moreover, string theory incorporates several ideas
which do not yet have experimental evidence but which are considered to be likely
candidates for physics beyond the standard model. Prime examples are supersymmetry
and axions.


   However, while the broad brush picture looks good, the finer details have yet to
be painted. String theory does not provide unique predictions for low-energy physics
but instead orders a bewildering array of possibilities, mostly dependent on what is
hidden in those extra dimensions. Partly, this problem is inherent to any theory of
quantum gravity: as we’ll review shortly, it’s a long way down from the Planck scale
to the domestic energy scales explored at the LHC. Using quantum gravity to extract
predictions for particle physics is akin to using QCD to extract predictions for how
coffee makers work. But the mere fact that it’s hard is little comfort if we’re looking
for convincing evidence that string theory describes the world in which we live.


   While string theory cannot at present offer falsifiable predictions, it has nonetheless
inspired new and imaginative proposals for solving outstanding problems in particle
physics and cosmology. There are scenarios in which string theory might reveal itself
in forthcoming experiments. Perhaps we’ll find extra dimensions at the LHC, perhaps
we’ll see a network of fundamental strings stretched across the sky, or perhaps we’ll
detect some feature of non-Gaussianity in the CMB that is characteristic of D-branes
at work during inflation. My personal feeling however is that each of these is a long
shot and we may not know whether string theory is right or wrong within our lifetimes.
Of course, the history of physics is littered with naysayers, wrongly suggesting that
various theories will never be testable. With luck, I’ll be one of them.


Reason 3. String theory provides new perspectives on gauge theories
String theory was born from attempts to understand the strong force. Almost forty
years later, this remains one of the prime motivations for the subject. String theory
provides tools with which to analyze down-to-earth aspects of quantum field theory
that are far removed from high-falutin’ ideas about gravity and black holes.




    Of immediate relevance to this course are the pedagogical reasons to invest time in
string theory. At heart, it is the study of conformal field theory and gauge symmetry.
The techniques that we’ll learn are not isolated to string theory, but apply to countless
systems which have direct application to real world physics.


  On a deeper level, string theory provides new and very surprising methods to under-
stand aspects of quantum gauge theories. Of these, the most startling is the AdS/CFT
correspondence, first conjectured by Juan Maldacena, which gives a relationship be-
tween strongly coupled quantum field theories and gravity in higher dimensions. These
ideas have been applied in areas ranging from nuclear physics to condensed matter
physics and have provided qualitative (and arguably quantitative) insights into strongly
coupled phenomena.


Reason 4. String theory provides new results in mathematics
For the past 250 years, the close relationship between mathematics and physics has
been almost a one-way street: physicists borrowed many things from mathematicians
but, with a few noticeable exceptions, gave little back. In recent times, that has
changed. Ideas and techniques from string theory and quantum field theory have been
employed to give new “proofs” and, perhaps more importantly, suggest new directions
and insights in mathematics. The most well known of these is mirror symmetry, a
relationship between topologically different Calabi-Yau manifolds.


   The four reasons described above also crudely characterize the string theory commu-
nity: there are “relativists” and “phenomenologists” and “field theorists” and “math-
ematicians”. Of course, the lines between these different sub-disciplines are not fixed
and one of the great attractions of string theory is its ability to bring together people
working in different areas — from cosmology to condensed matter to pure mathematics
— and provide a framework in which they can profitably communicate. In my opinion,
it is this cross-fertilization between fields which is the greatest strength of string theory.


0.1 Quantum Gravity
This is a starter course in string theory. Our focus will be on the perturbative approach
to the bosonic string and, in particular, why this gives a consistent theory of quantum
gravity. Before we leap into this, it is probably best to say a few words about quantum
gravity itself. Like why it’s hard. And why it’s important. (And why it’s not).


Throughout these lectures we work in units with ~ = c = 1. The Planck mass Mpl
defines an energy scale


  There are a couple of simple lessons that we can already take from this. The first is
that the relevant coupling in the quantum theory is 1/Mpl . To see that this is indeed
the case from the perspective of the action, we consider small perturbations around flat
Minkowski space,


The factor of 1/Mpl is there to ensure that when we expand out the Einstein-Hilbert
action, the kinetic term for h is canonically normalized, meaning that it comes with no
powers of Mpl . This then gives the kind of theory that you met in your first course on
quantum field theory, albeit with an infinite series of interaction terms,


Each of these terms is schematic: if you were to do this explicitly, you would find a
mess of indices contracted in different ways. We see that the interactions are suppressed
by powers of Mpl . This means that quantum perturbation theory is an expansion in
the dimensionless ratio E 2 /Mpl2 , where E is the energy associated to the process of
interest. We learn that gravity is weak, and therefore under control, at low-energies.
But gravitational interactions become strong as the energy involved approaches the
Planck scale. In the language of the renormalization group, couplings of this type are
known as irrelevant.


  The second lesson to take away is that the Planck scale Mpl is very very large. The
LHC will probe the electroweak scale, MEW 103 GeV. The ratio is MEW /Mpl 10 15 .
For this reason, quantum gravity will not affect your daily life, even if your daily life
involves the study of the most extreme observable conditions in the universe.


 Gravity is Non-Renormalizable
Quantum field theories with irrelevant couplings are typically ill-behaved at high-
energies, rendering the theory ill-defined. Gravity is no exception. Theories of this
type are called non-renormalizable, which means that the divergences that appear in
the Feynman diagram expansion cannot be absorbed by a finite number of countert-
erms. In pure Einstein gravity, the symmetries of the theory are enough to ensure that
the one-loop S-matrix is finite. The first divergence occurs at two-loops and requires
the introduction of a counterterm of the form,




This makes the situation marginally worse, with the first diver-
gence now appearing at one-loop. The Feynman diagram in the
figure shows particle scattering through the exchange of two gravi-
tons. When the momentum k running in the loop is large, the
diagram is badly divergent: it scales as


Non-renormalizable theories are commonplace in the history of physics, the most com-
monly cited example being Fermi’s theory of the weak interaction. The first thing to say
about them is that they are far from useless! Non-renormalizable theories are typically
viewed as effective field theories, valid only up to some energy scale. One deals with
the divergences by simply admitting ignorance beyond this scale and treating as a
UV cut-off on any momentum integral. In this way, we get results which are valid to an
accuracy of E/⇤ (perhaps raised to some power). In the case of the  p weak interaction,
Fermi’s theory accurately predicts physics up to an energy scale of 1/GF 100 GeV.
In the case of quantum gravity, Einstein’s theory works to an accuracy of (E/Mpl )2 .






    However, non-renormalizable theories are typically unable to describe physics at their
cut-off scale or beyond. This is because they are missing the true ultra-violet degrees
of freedom which tame the high-energy behaviour. In the case of the weak force, these
new degrees of freedom are the W and Z bosons. We would like to know what missing
degrees of freedom are needed to complete gravity.


Singularities
Only a particle physicist would phrase all questions about the universe in terms of
scattering amplitudes. In general relativity we typically think about the geometry as
a whole, rather than bastardizing the Einstein-Hilbert action and discussing perturba-
tions around flat space. In this language, the question of high-energy physics turns into
one of short distance physics. Classical general relativity is not to be trusted in regions
where the curvature of spacetime approaches the Planck scale and ultimately becomes
singular. A quantum theory of gravity should resolve these singularities.


   The question of spacetime singularities is morally equivalent to that of high-energy
scattering. Both probe the ultra-violet nature of gravity. A spacetime geometry is
made of a coherent collection of gravitons, just as the electric and magnetic fields in a
laser are made from a collection of photons. The short distance structure of spacetime
is governed – after Fourier transform – by high momentum gravitons. Understanding
spacetime singularities and high-energy scattering are different sides of the same coin.


  There are two situations in general relativity where singularity theorems tell us that
the curvature of spacetime gets large: at the big bang and in the center of a black hole.
These provide two of the biggest challenges to any putative theory of quantum gravity.


Gravity is Subtle
It is often said that general relativity contains the seeds of its own destruction. The
theory is unable to predict physics at the Planck scale and freely admits to it. Problems
such as non-renormalizability and singularities are, in a Rumsfeldian sense, known
unknowns. However, the full story is more complicated and subtle. On the one hand,
the issue of non-renormalizability may not quite be the crisis that it first appears. On
the other hand, some aspects of quantum gravity suggest that general relativity isn’t
as honest about its own failings as is usually advertised. The theory hosts a number of
unknown unknowns, things that we didn’t even know that we didn’t know. We won’t
have a whole lot to say about these issues in this course, but you should be aware of
them. Here I mention only a few salient points.




    Firstly, there is a key difference between Fermi’s theory of the weak interaction and
gravity. Fermi’s theory
                     p     was unable to provide predictions for any scattering process
at energies above 1/GF . In contrast, if we scatter two objects at extremely high-
energies in gravity — say, at energies E          Mpl — then we know exactly what will
happen: we form a big black hole. We don’t need quantum gravity to tell us this.
Classical general relativity is sufficient. If we restrict attention to scattering, the crisis
of non-renormalizability is not problematic at ultra-high energies. It’s troublesome only
within a window of energies around the Planck scale.


   Similar caveats hold for singularities. If you are foolish enough to jump into a black
hole, then you’re on your own: without a theory of quantum gravity, no one can tell you
what fate lies in store at the singularity. Yet, if you are smart and stay outside of the
black hole, you’ll be hard pushed to see any effects of quantum gravity. This is because
Nature has conspired to hide Planck scale curvatures from our inquisitive eyes. In the
case of black holes this is achieved through cosmic censorship which is a conjecture in
classical general relativity that says singularities are hidden behind horizons. In the
case of the big bang, it is achieved through inflation, washing away any traces from the
very early universe. Nature appears to shield us from the effects of quantum gravity,
whether in high-energy scattering or in singularities. I think it’s fair to say that no one
knows if this conspiracy is pointing at something deep, or is merely inconvenient for
scientists trying to probe the Planck scale.


   While horizons may protect us from the worst excesses of singularities, they come
with problems of their own. These are the unknown unknowns: difficulties that arise
when curvatures are small and general relativity says “trust me”. The entropy of black
holes and the associated paradox of information loss strongly suggest that local quan-
tum field theory breaks down at macroscopic distance scales. Attempts to formulate
quantum gravity in de Sitter space, or in the presence of eternal inflation, hint at similar
difficulties. Ideas of holography, black hole complimentarity and the AdS/CFT corre-
spondence all point towards non-local effects and the emergence of spacetime. These are
the deep puzzles of quantum gravity and their relationship to the ultra-violet properties
of gravity is unclear.


  As a final thought, let me mention the one observation that has an outside chance of
being related to quantum gravity: the cosmological constant. With an energy scale of
⇤ 10 3 eV it appears to have little to do with ultra-violet physics. If it does have its
origins in a theory of quantum gravity, it must either be due to some subtle “unknown
unknown”, or because it is explained away as an environmental quantity as in string
theory.


 Is the Time Ripe?
Our current understanding of physics, embodied in the standard model, is valid up to
energy scales of 103 GeV. This is 15 orders of magnitude away from the Planck scale.
Why do we think the time is now ripe to tackle quantum gravity? Surely we are like
the ancient Greeks arguing about atomism. Why on earth do we believe that we’ve
developed the right tools to even address the question?


  The honest answer, I think, is hubris.


   However, there is mild circumstantial evidence
that the framework of quantum field theory might
hold all the way to the Planck scale without any-
thing very dramatic happening in between. The
main argument is unification. The three coupling
constants of Nature run logarithmically, meeting
miraculously at the GUT energy scale of 1015 GeV.
Just slightly later, the fourth force of Nature, grav-
ity, joins them. While not overwhelming, this does
provide a hint that perhaps quantum field theory
                                                                  Figure 2:
can be taken seriously at these ridiculous scales.
Historically I suspect this was what convinced large parts of the community that it was
ok to speak about processes at 1018 GeV.


  Finally, perhaps the most compelling argument for studying physics at the Planck
scale is that string theory does provide a consistent unified quantum theory of gravity
and the other forces. Given that we have this theory sitting in our laps, it would be
foolish not to explore its consequences. The purpose of these lecture notes is to begin
this journey.